This article examines a series of five communicative
textbooks that are being used currently to teach English
as a foreign language EFL in Colombia and are regarded as
major resources to help students develop communicative
competence. It will be determined whether or not these
instructional materials offer learners solid communicative
activities to strengthen their opportunities to become
communicatively competent. The criterion for evaluating
the textbooks in question is based on the three types
of language practice mechanical, meaningful, and communicative
proposed by Jack Richards 2005. According
to him, these practices advocate communicative language
learning in the EFL context.
Razmloo 2007: 127 claims the affluence of published
materials now available on the market makes selection of
the right textbooks a challenging task. Hence, examination
of the communicative level of the English texts chosen
for this article is intended to make English teachers aware
of the methodological strengths and weaknesses these
kinds of instructional materials have. English teachers will
also realize to what extent they can rely on textbooks in
their daily teaching practice. Likewise, they will learn key
specifications that will enable them to make wise decisions
when it comes to selecting, evaluating, and implementing
English textbooks at the institutions where they work.
Theoretical Considerations
Over the last four decades, Communicative Language
Teaching CLT has been recognized as an ideal
approach to help learners acquire a foreign language.
The new directions in the theory of language proposed
by Chomsky helped CLT to emerge. According to Richards
and Rodgers 2006, Chomsky recognized the current standard
structural theories on language as being incapable
of accounting for the fundamental characteristics of language;
namely, the creativity and uniqueness of individual
sentences. Since CLT is a teaching language approach that
mainly sees language as a system for communication,
it attempts to develop communicative competence.
Communicative competence is a term introduced by
Hymes 1972, who defined it as the ability to convey and
interpret messages and to negotiate meaning with other
speakers in specific contexts. Over the years, the term has
been discussed and redefined by many authors,
such as Canale and Swain 1980, Savignon 1997,
2001, and Bachman 1999. The notion of communicative
competence centers primarily on
the negotiation of meaning in real situational
contexts. In this respect, Canale and Swain 1983
distinguished four categories that define the notion
of communicative competence. The first two
refer to use of the linguistic system: grammatical
competence and discourse competence. The
former allows speakers to know and understand
the appropriate use of language forms. Without
knowledge of the linguistic code, communication
would be absolutely impossible. The latter is
every speaker’s ability to connect sentences in
a meaningful and coherent discourse. The third
category is socio-linguistic competence, which
involves knowledge of the socio-cultural rules of
language and the discourse in which language
is used. It embodies the ability to understand the
context or situational reality in which we communicate
something meaningful. The fourth
category is strategic competence, which refers to
the verbal and nonverbal communication strategies
speakers use to compensate for breakdowns
in communication due to insufficient levels of
competence. In other words, speakers are able
to use strategies to compensate for an imperfect
knowledge of rules and a lack of vocabulary
in the communicative process. Paraphrasing, repeating,
and guessing are examples of strategic
verbal competence. Gestures, mimicking, and
body positions are examples of strategic nonverbal
competence. All these strategies are valid
when learners intend to negotiate meaning.
Canale’s and Swain’s theory of communicative
competence was modified in a more detailed
way by Bachman 1991. He places grammatical
competence and textual competence in a category
called organizational competence to allude
to the entire linguistic system of language formation,
such as the connection among sentences
to form longer discourses. Bachman also divides 
pragmatic competence into two subcategories: illocutionary
competence, which deals with the act of receiving/
sending intended meanings in normal interaction, and
socio-linguistic competence, which involves aspects of
politeness, dialects, figures of speech, and cultural manifestations.
Bachman does not include strategic competence
in his classification. He categorizes it as a separate element
of communicative language ability, specifically one that
helps learners to compensate for communication during
the process of meaning negotiation.
Later, Byram 1997: 8 explained that Hymes, the
initiator of the concept of communicative competence,
prompted an awareness of the relationship between
linguistic and socio-cultural competence. In fact, Hymes
described linguistic competence as just one kind of cultural
competence. He stated that children develop a general
theory of speaking appropriate in their community, which
they employ, like other forms of tacit cultural knowledge
in conducting and interpreting social life” Hymes, 1972:
279. In citing Hymes, Byram said the teaching of foreign
languages has been concerned more with the linguistic
development of language than the cultural implications
language brings about. This is because language teaching
has been influenced largely by linguistic analysis,
leaving out cultural competence. For that reason, Byram
restated and complemented the notion of communicative
competence as Intercultural Communicative Competence
in an attempt to rescue the substantial presence
of the cultural dimension that language contains. Byram
1997: 22 remarked that foreign language teaching should
concern itself not only with the practical questions of linguistic
competence for communication, but also with
the relationship between the language and the cultural
practices and beliefs of a particular group. Accordingly,
it is essential to recognize that competence in a foreign
language also implies the acquisition and recognition of
cultural practices. Therefore, the most complete term Byram
proposes is intercultural communicative competence.
Savignon 2001: 8 also contributed to the definition
of communicative competence or intercultural communicative
competence by stressing that communicative
competence is relative and depends mainly on the cooperation
of all participants, because it is a very dynamic
conception in which at least two individuals are
involved in the process of negotiating meaning.
The Common European Framework of Reference
for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment
CEFRL refers to the properties of communicative
competence in much the same way:
Language use, embracing language learning,
comprises the actions performed by persons
who are individuals and as social agents develop
a range of competences, both general
and in particular communicative language
competences. They draw on the competences
as their disposal in various contexts under
various conditions and under various constrains
to engage in language activities involving
language processes to produce and/or receive
texts in relations to themes in specific
domains, activating those strategies which
seem most appropriate for carrying out the
tasks to be accomplished 9.
This idea suggests that language competence
is the ability that allows learners to establish
successful communication in a foreign language,
in genuine contexts, and through everyday tasks
found in real life. Being competent implies more
than knowing the linguistic code; it also necessitates
being able to negotiate meaning and to
interact socially in the target language.
The foregoing perspectives on the concept of
intercultural communicative competence lead us to
consider the principles of CLT as being the following: